You're listening to the data flowcast 
 where we unlock the secrets of mastering 
 airflow for data engineering in AI. 
 Hi everyone, welcome to the data 
 flowcast. I'm your host Kenton Danis and 
 today I'm joined by Christos BCS who is 
 an open source software engineer at G 
 Research. Christos, how are you? 
 >> I'm fine, thank you. How about you? 
 >> Yeah, I'm doing well. I'm doing well. 
 It's great to have you on. Uh let's go 
 ahead and dive in. So for today's 
 podcast, we're going to discuss how the 
 G research open source software team 
 contributes to Airflow. I'm very excited 
 to get into this. I always love hearing 
 from contributors to the project. Uh but 
 before we get into that, let's start 
 with some background. Can you tell us 
 about what G Research does? 
 >> Uh yes, G Research is a leading 
 quantitative research and technology 
 firm. We use a lot of machine learning, 
 a lot of big data and emerging tech uh 
 to predict movements in in financial 
 markets and to try to answer the biggest 
 questions in finance. 
 >> Okay, very interesting. And at a high 
 level, how does your company use 
 Airflow? We deal heavily with big data 
 and we perform a lot of data 
 transformations and so we schedule and 
 automate all these transformations with 
 airflow. Um, basically we are using it 
 for scheduling data and business 
 analytics. 
 >> Okay, interesting. Yeah, that makes 
 sense. And so what does your team 
 specifically do? 
 >> As you as you mentioned, I'm part of the 
 open source team. Uh we have our own 
 open source projects that we are 
 actively uh developing and maintaining 
 and we also contribute to other open 
 source projects like airflow on behalf 
 of G research 
 and we provide technical support to all 
 the other teams that we have which are 
 using the open source software that we 
 are developing and maintaining. 
 >> Okay, got it. So you're providing 
 internal support to all of the teams 
 that are using Airflow and also 
 contributing to the project. 
 >> Yes, exactly. 
 >> Yeah. Very cool. And tell me a little 
 bit more about why the company is 
 investing in having you contribute to 
 open source. That's not something we 
 always hear about from Airflow users and 
 I would love to hear more about the why 
 they think that that's a valuable use of 
 time. 
 >> I mean, if you get down to it, it's just 
 a business decision. It's much cheaper 
 to contribute to an open source software 
 and maintain it than it is to uh buy it 
 or license it and also it's nice to have 
 your own in-house technical support uh 
 that knows your exact use cases because 
 sometimes if you are depending on other 
 company a third party and you need 
 support from them you cannot always 
 share your your exact business model and 
 use cases and what you are doing. 
 >> Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Uh I would love 
 to use that for for other companies to 
 encourage them to contribute to the open 
 source project as well. Of course, as 
 you're saying, if you contribute, you 
 get to influence the direction of the 
 project in the way that works best for 
 your company. So, 
 >> it's it's always better to contribute to 
 contribute your changes than to maintain 
 a fork. 
 >> Yeah, of course. Definitely maintaining 
 a fork is a challenging route. I we've 
 seen some companies do that but it they 
 tend to run into issues I think at some 
 point down the line. It's definitely a 
 lot of work. So talking about a specific 
 contribution I you've spoken recently 
 about uh open telemetry and airflow and 
 using those two together. Um and before 
 we get into your contributions on that I 
 just want to hear more about this 
 integration and why it's important to 
 your team. I think that I should start 
 with explaining what open telemetry is. 
 >> I don't think that a lot of people are 
 familiar with open telemetry. It's 
 actually a collection of tools that we 
 use to collect metrics, logs and data. 
 Um and then we use all this data to 
 monitor our system and get a better 
 understanding in a deeper level. Uh so 
 each data each of three these three 
 types provides a different a different 
 view. Now my presentation the airflow 
 summit focused on traces. What's a 
 what's a trace? Um let's assume that we 
 have an operation like for example we 
 have a web app and we have a button and 
 that button makes a makes a operation 
 makes a call to a backend API and the 
 API makes a call to a database and then 
 returns something to the API and the API 
 sends a response back to the front end. 
 That whole thing all these steps are a 
 trace and each individual step is a span 
 and to put it in airflow context 
 a trace could be a diagram run and the 
 entire diagram run is a trace and then 
 each individual step which is a task 
 it's a span. Now the thing is that so 
 with traces and spans they trace and 
 spans hold some data like for example 
 the start time the end time and then 
 they have the attributes which are key 
 value pairs and which we can we can use 
 them to expose internal values that we 
 have during runtime. Now we know the 
 start time and the end time of a task 
 from the web server UI. We don't need a 
 span to tell to tell us that. But the 
 thing is that we can also create our own 
 spans under a task and monitor 
 individual steps. Like for example, if a 
 task uh consists of five or 10 different 
 steps and it's very slow or for some 
 reason it hangs, we could create our own 
 spans for each individual step. See how 
 long it takes and that that's going to 
 give us a lot of options. Like for 
 example, if we find that step three of 
 the task is where it takes most of the 
 time like um 80% of the of the task 
 execution, we can we can uh find a way 
 to optimize it uh increase performance 
 or maybe refactor it or find another 
 way. Anyway, you get so many options uh 
 when you have all the insights. 
 >> Okay, interesting. So it's helping you 
 profile those tasks and what's going on 
 in them. 
 >> Yeah. Yeah. It's it helps you gain 
 better visibility. Like for example, one 
 task and this is very common. Someone 
 could be using a task to make a call to 
 an external service and you can also 
 monitor that. You can create another 
 span for that and you can know how long 
 that call took and how long the 
 operation the external service took and 
 connect all of them. And using 
 visualization back ends like Yak, you 
 have a tree view where you know how long 
 each node took to run. 
 >> Cool. Yeah, that sounds very helpful. 
 And then so this is something that you 
 have implemented at your company and are 
 using to help other teams the teams that 
 use Airflow run more efficiently. Is 
 that right? 
 >> Yeah. But I also contribute that all to 
 the upstream repo. So that Yeah. And and 
 there are docs and people can read the 
 docs and you know enable open telemetry. 
 They can set up an open telemetry 
 collector. 
 um and then enable that and and start 
 using it with airflow and see how so 
 there are there are some default spans 
 that get exported once you enable open 
 telemetry in your flow configuration. 
 There are some default spans like 
 there's the root span which represents 
 the entire diagram and then there are 
 other spans one span for each task but 
 you can you can extend that and you can 
 add your own code and create your own 
 spans from from under the tasks. 
 I mean that that was part of my uh 
 presentation at the airflow summit. I 
 had a few examples of how people can add 
 their own spans under the tasks. And by 
 the way, that only works in Airflow 3.0 
 and upwards. If someone is running Yeah. 
 If someone is running an older version 
 like 2.10, it it's not going to work 
 very well because the the initial 
 implementation uh it was it wasn't 
 working as expected. 
 >> Okay, I see. Um that's great that it's 
 already working on the newest major 
 version. I'm curious if you're during 
 your talk at the Airflow Summit or maybe 
 um remotely elsewhere, have you heard 
 about other teams implementing the same 
 thing now that you've contributed it 
 back or just using it? Have folks been 
 interested um indicated that it would 
 also be helpful for their teams. 
 >> Yeah. Yeah. Uh after the presentation, a 
 lot of people came to me and we we had I 
 had a few discussions with people using 
 it or they were they were keen to use 
 it. I mean they they didn't know that it 
 worked with her flow three. So I yeah I 
 I did a demo at the end of a 
 presentation so and yeah not not many 
 people were familiar with it but a lot 
 of people are familiar with open dilemma 
 they they just went so well they didn't 
 know it worked with airflow. 
 >> Yeah. Okay cool. And now that you've 
 done this implementation for your team 
 and you've contributed it to the open 
 source project, are there any is there 
 further work that you're looking to do 
 on it? Is it now it works and it's done 
 or are you looking to optimize it in any 
 way? 
 >> Okay, I think that traces are in uh in a 
 very good state. They are working, but 
 I've been looking at other at other 
 areas lately um like for example 
 metrics. Now the the open telemetry 
 matrix implementation was very good but 
 I found a few discrepancies between 
 between the docs and the actual metrics 
 that get exported and and so I've been 
 doing some work around that. I'm 
 actually having an open PR right now, an 
 open p request uh where I'm trying to 
 add a YAML file that will keep track of 
 all the metrics throughout the project 
 and then the the idea is to enforce some 
 text uh in the CI so that when people 
 add new matrix they always have to exist 
 in the YAML so that the YAML file uh 
 will be the single source of truth and 
 also the YAML will be used to build the 
 docs and that way we can make sure that 
 there are no discrepancies and so when 
 you read something in the docs it's 
 there if you enable open telemetry 
 prometheus or might be doing might be 
 using stats d or data dog whatever back 
 end you're using once you enable the 
 configuration you check prometheus 
 graphana the metrics are are always 
 there what you've read in the config in 
 the docs is there 
 >> yeah okay got 
 Um, love hearing about Doc's 
 contributions. Those are really 
 important. Outside of your work on open 
 telemetry and Airflow, are there any 
 other Airflow contributions that you and 
 your team have worked on recently that 
 you think are particularly exciting? 
 >> Another work that I have been doing, I 
 have been looking at the schedule 
 performance. I mean, we uh we had a very 
 powerful computer. we were running some 
 DS and tasks and we could see that we uh 
 the it wasn't utilizing 100% of the CPUs 
 like for the scheduleuler and the 
 workers and so we started doing some 
 digging and we found out that and 
 theuler has this idea where it picks a 
 lot of tasks to examine and cure but in 
 in fact after after it picks all the 
 task and retrieves them from the 
 database it applies a bunch of units And 
 that ends up in in case the the schedule 
 has already reached the limits and it 
 cannot really queue any more tasks. It's 
 it does it just does unnecessary 
 computations. 
 And so that that was decreasing 
 throughput. The scheduleuler was doing 
 all this work without actually 
 scheduling anything. And we found out 
 that if we just include the limits in 
 the initial query that retrieves the 
 task from the database that makes the 
 scheduleuler always uh pick up the 
 number of tasks that it can actually 
 queue and also that's true for for a DAG 
 like for example you could have a limit 
 that can schedule only four tasks for a 
 particular DAG. Um you would have 
 reached that limit and then it would 
 still go on and pick 30 or 40 tasks from 
 that DAG. Although it was at the maximum 
 level, it couldn't schedule anymore. So 
 a whole a whole schedule would just go 
 wasted. H it wouldn't schedule anything 
 because it concentrated in a D where can 
 reach max concurrency. Um and so by 
 including the the limits at the start of 
 it um that increased throughput a lot 
 like for examp if you have the the 
 shrier the load the greater the 
 performance increase and that's 
 something um I I've run a lot of tests 
 there are some people from from 
 astronomer that have also run a lot of 
 tests 
 and they've seen that they have come to 
 the same conclusions as me that that 
 that's a huge improvement that makes a 
 lot of difference and so we we are still 
 running some more tests but trying to 
 cover all the edge cases and see that 
 there's no regression but if all goes 
 well that that should be into the main 
 repo soon 
 >> okay that's great mean probably 
 inclusion in the next minor release yeah 
 that's that's a really exciting 
 improvement that will impact everybody 
 using airflow right 
 >> yeah Yeah, that's a great example. Any 
 other projects that you wanted to cover 
 that you're working on or contributions 
 I should say? 
 >> No, these are the major ones and I'm 
 also doing some Yeah, everything has bug 
 fixes. 
 >> Okay, 
 those are also very important though 
 maybe not as interesting to go through 
 one by one. 
 Yeah. Okay. Very cool. Well, thank you 
 for giving the details on both of those 
 uh projects. Those are both really 
 valuable contributions uh for Airflow. I 
 always like to end with a standard final 
 question for folks and that is uh what 
 would you most like to see from the 
 Airflow project in the near future maybe 
 that you're not already contributing on 
 buters 
 or something. Um 
 me and my team we are very content with 
 weather flows today. But uh there are 
 some very interesting changes in the 
 task SDK and the whole separation with 
 the task uh with the task execution path 
 and also that uh that effort to make D 
 language agnostic like I mean in the 
 future you could write DAX in whatever 
 language you want. Um, it doesn't have 
 to be Python at some point. Could even 
 be Java. And yeah, who knows? Uh, with 
 the whole separation of the task SDK, it 
 could be at some point people could be 
 importing it into other projects and 
 just using it as a dependency. I mean, 
 that's that's very interesting. 
 >> Yeah. Are there other languages that you 
 would write DAGs in if that was 
 available today? 
 >> I mean, yeah, sure. Java would be one 
 and I mean uh you know not everyone is 
 familiar with all the languages. Uh 
 sometimes you end up in a project and 
 you're writing a language that you 
 hardly even before like for example I I 
 wasn't that much familiar with Python 
 until I started working in airflow and 
 yeah if you can do the same thing in a 
 language that you are familiar with and 
 you know best yeah why not? Yeah, 
 absolutely. Definitely a feature that 
 there's a lot of excitement around. Uh, 
 okay. Well, that's great. Um, Christo, 
 it's been really nice speaking with you. 
 Thanks so much for going through all of 
 that. Uh, to close us out, what is the 
 best way for folks to get in touch with 
 you? 
 >> Well, thank you. 
 People come, I mean, um, got it. I think 
 the best way is my email which is 
 available on my GitHub and from my 
 GitHub profile can also get my LinkedIn 
 profile. That's another way to reach me. 
 Uh yeah. 
 >> Okay, great. We'll put all of that in 
 the show notes uh so folks can get it 
 get it if they need it. Um okay. Well, 
 thank you again for coming on. It's been 
 a pleasure speaking with you. 
 >> Thank you very much. A pleasure from me, 
 too.
